The nonsurgical and surgical management of
painful temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders
has evolved over the centuries. Unfortunately,
etiologic sophisms and often unproven mecha-
nistic treatment philosophies still survive.
Reviewing the history of the management of TMJ
disorders not only addresses the complexity of
the problem, but also demonstrates the impor-
tance of being aware of the prior pitfalls so that as
the science of diagnosis and management unfold,
we as clinicians and researchers do not continue
to fall into or repeat the shortcomings of the past
in the future.
Writings dating from the ancient Egyptians,
Hippocrates, Vesalius described reduction of the
dislocated mandible [1].Thereafter, surgery dom-
inated the earliest management of TMJ disorders.
The earliest report involved the concept of inter-
nal derangement of the TMJ articular disc. This
mechanical concept was first described relative to
L. G. Mercuri (*)
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Rush University
Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
e-mail: louis_g_mercuri@rush.edu
the TMJ disc in 1826 by Astley Paston Cooper
[2].Then, in 1887, Thomas Annandale discussed
internal derangement of the TMJ and reported the
repair of a torn TMJ disc with horse hair in a
woman with persistent TMJ pain [3]. In subse-
quent decades, reports followed related to the use
of discectomy in the management of displaced
TMJ discs [4–6].However, inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria, standards for successful outcomes,
and follow-up were not reported.
Mid-twentieth century, reports surfaced con-
cerning the use of discectomy to manage the
anteriorly dislocated TMJ disc associated with
degenerative joint disease [7–9].In 1951, Ireland
[10] discussed the use of condylectomy to treat
anterior dislocation of the disc; and in 1957,
Henny and Baldridge [11] presented a series of
cases in which arthroplasty was used to treat
painful TMJ dysfunction.
Temporomandibular joint surgery lost popu-
larity in the 1960s as clinicians turned to nonsur-
gical options for the management of TMJ
disorders. Surgery was relegated to clinical and
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. Bhargava (ed.), Temporomandibular Joint Disorders,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-2754-5_1
12
L. G. Mercuri
radiographically obvious pathology, such as which involves a combination of biological, psy-
ankylosis and neoplasia.
chological, and social factors [26, 27]. As a result,
The move toward nonsurgical management domains related to orthopedic principles, neuro-
has been linked to another mechanically based physiological aspects of pain, neuroanatomic
theory. Costen [12] resurrected the old notion regions of pain processing, molecular, genetic,
that tooth loss resulted in posterior and superior and cellular pathophysiology of muscle and
displacement of the mandibular condyle with joints and behavioral aspects of chronic pain are
resultant impingement of the condyle on the presently being investigated [28].
auditory canal causing pain in both the TMJ and
In the early 1970s, despite the successful man-
the ear [13–17]. This concept was anatomically agement of many muscle related TMJ pain and
discredited by Sicher [18] and Zimmerman [19]. dysfunction patients using the tenets of the bio-
With the discrediting of Costen’s mandibular psychosocial model, there remained a group of
overclosure theory, hypotheses related to occlu- intractable chronic TMJ pain patients. Farrar and
sal disharmony and malocclusion arose and Wilkes rediscovered and resurrected the concept
became influential. These mechanically oriented, of internal derangement. They related chronic
gnathological theories suggested that during TMJ pain, headache, ear pain, and mandibular
mandibular closure occlusal interferences cause dysfunction, along with other craniofacial pains,
mandibular condyle displacement leading to to an uncoordinated function of the disc, condyle,
pressure on the highly innervated, vascular retro- articular eminence, and superior head of the lat-
discal TMJ tissue resulting in pain and bony eral pterygoid muscle. Armed with this concept,
degeneration due to loss of blood supply to joint surgeons started managing chronic TMJ pain and
structures [20–23]. It has since been well-­ dysfunction as internal derangement which
documented that there is an absence of a disease-­ involved open TMJ surgery disc repositioning
specific association between malocclusion and [29–33] or discectomy [34].
TMJ disorders. Therefore, presently there are no
Arthroscopy, and later arthrocentesis, emerged
grounds for further hypothesizing the role of den- as bridges between nonsurgical [35] and surgical
tal occlusion or malocclusion in the pathophysi- management of TMJ internal derangement.
ology of TMJ disorders. Clinicians are Ohnishi and Murakami were the first to apply
encouraged to abandon this old gnathological arthroscopying patients with internal derange-
paradigm [24].
ment and arthrosis [36, 37]. Holmlund and
Schwartz [1] was the first to demonstrate that Hellsing [38], McCain [39] and Sanders [40] pro-
masticatory muscle tension patterns could be vided studies related to TMJ arthroscopic lysis
seen in a majority of patients with TMJ pain and lavage. Yang [41] and McCain [42] devel-
tested. He related this muscle tension to emo- oped arthroscopic TMJ disc repositioning
tional stress and suggested the term procedures.
“Temporomandibular joint Pain-Dysfunction
TMJ arthroscopy and magnetic resonance
Syndrome.” Then Laskin, based on extensive imaging (MRI) [43] provided much more detailed
clinical and laboratory research, formulated the information about not only the disc, but also the
Myofascial Pain-Dysfunction (MPD) Syndrome pathobiology of TMJ disorders in general as well
theory which like Schwartz stressed emotional as paving the way for minimally invasive TMJ
rather than mechanical factors leading to masti- arthrocentesis [44].
catory muscle pain and TMJ dysfunction [25].
In 1982 the United States Food and Drug
Over the following decades, the field under- Administration (FDA) authorized the sale of the
went many taxonomic and conceptual changes. Proplast-Teflon Interpositional TMJ Implant and
Currently the most popular theories regarding the total TMJ implants by Vitek, Inc. (Houston, TX)
nonsurgical management of muscle related TMJ [45].After implantation with these devices, many
pain are based on the biopsychosocial model, patients presented with irreversible and life alter-1
Temporomandibular Joint from the Pyramids to Total Joint Replacement and Beyond
ing signs and symptoms. Reports surfaced that
both were causally related to the hard and soft
tissue damage created by failure of the Proplast-­
Teflon TMJ devices and the foreign body giant
cell reaction that developed. Therefore, in
January 1991, the FDA ordered Vitek to remove
its implants from the market [46].
Since Proplast Teflon caused so much bony
destruction and consequent significant glenoid
fossa architectural variation from the normal, it
was extremely difficult to align properly and sta-
bilize the available stock TMJ replacement device
[47] components to reconstruct those patients.
This led to the development of a computer
assisted design/computer assisted manufactured
(CAD/CAM) custom patient fitted total TMJ
replacement device in 1989 to directly deal with
these anatomical discrepancies and issues of
device component and fixation long-term
stability.
In 1990, Mercuri and Techmedica (Camarillo,
CA) developed a prospective multicenter CAD/
CAM custom patient fitted total TMJ replace-
ment device clinical trials study [48]. Using
mechanical and clinical outcomes data from that
publication, in 1999 the TMJ Concepts (Ventura,
CA) Patient Fitted TMJ Reconstruction Prosthesis
was FDA approved as safe and effective for
implantation.
From 1995 to 2005, a clinical trial was con-
ducted by Zimmer Biomet (Jacksonville, FL)
using the stock Biomet Microfixation Walter
Lorenz Total TMJ Replacement System devel-
oped in consultation with Quinn [49]. This device
was FDA approved in 2005 for implantation.
Long-term follow-up data for both these
devices [50, 51] has demonstrated safety and
effectiveness for the management of end-stage
TMJ disease [52].
Ellege et al. [53] reported that 15 countries
have since developed, or are in the process of
developing, 27 TMJ replacement systems. 21 are
custom designed and some are 3D printed. The
authors found that at publication all of the TMJ
systems they found were not equal in terms of
design, material composition, preclinical labora-
tory testing, manufacturing methods, regulatory
status, and reporting of clinical outcomes. Those
3
important elements varied widely among the
emerging systems. All of these are important
issues that must be addressed in the future to
assure these merging TMJ replacement devices
are truly safe and effective.
Polley et al. [54] concluded that utilization of
extended alloplastic TMJ and mandibular
replacement in severe grades of craniofacial
anomaly patients demonstrated consistently
excellent functional and esthetic results in a
series of skeletally mature patients. Therefore,
the authors felt that these devices offered the best
solution for salvage of craniofacial anomaly
patients who have had failed autogenous
reconstructions.
Hawkins et al. [55] demonstrated that 95% of
experienced TMJ surgeons surveyed preferred
alloplastic TMJ replacement to autogenous cos-
tochondral grafting because of fewer postopera-
tive complications and more predictable
outcomes.
In light of increased utilization of extended
alloplastic TMJ and mandibular replacements, to
assure meaningful clinical outcomes reporting
and analysis, Ellege et al. have proposed a clas-
sification system [56].
In conclusion, in the pursuit of understanding
the etiology, pathophysiology and management
of muscle related extra-articular and joint pathol-
ogy related intra-articular TMJ disorders will be
improved as long as both basic science and clini-
cal researchers pursue scientific methodology
and evidence-based management founded on
well-documented orthopedic joint related princi-
ples, rather than the sophisms and mechanical
schemes of the past.
Among the many questions future TMJ
researchers and clinicians must ponder are: What
part does a patient’s genetic profile play in TMJ
pain and dysfunction? Its etiology, pathophysiol-
ogy, and management? Are there synovial bio-
markers that are indicative of TMJ pathology?
Will improved joint replacement device designs
and materials improve their performance and
longevity?
